



netmod                                                         R. Peschi
Internet-Draft                                                 S. Ashraf
Intended status: Informational                                D. Rajaram
Expires: 20 March 2025                                             Nokia
                                                       16 September 2024


   Principle for populating list of YANG data nodes using a template
                               technique.
                  draft-yang-config-template-framework

Abstract

   In YANG design, templates refer to pre-defined structures or
   configurations that can be applied multiple times, potentially with
   variations, to ensure efficiency in managing complex networks.  These
   templates are essential when a network model requires repetitive
   configurations or shares a similar structural pattern across
   different network elements.

   While YANG itself doesn’t have a formal "template" keyword or
   specific syntax dedicated to templates, developers often achieve
   template-like behaviour through YANG constructs such as grouping,
   uses, typedef, and augment.  These constructs help modularize and
   standardize configurations.

   In a typical deployment, A parent device can host multiple functional
   entities (e.g. a sub-systems) which is replicated many times, where
   each such functional instance is to be controlled by a set of data
   nodes.  This can lead to long device configuration times, large
   memory footprint in the parent device and inefficient YANG validation
   procedures due to the large running data store size.  This becomes
   more and more difficult as the system grows bigger and integrated,
   which leads individual data designers to employ various methods as
   per the requirements.

   This document explores some of the constructs and highlights related
   issues while using such methods and possible solutions to mitigate
   such issues.

   This document presents a generic method that improves the efficiency
   issues mentioned above and which relies on features already available
   in the yang language that are supported by off-the-shelf toolset.  It
   should be considered as a method that can be used when designing a
   module for a specific purpose, possibly a specific standard.

About This Document




Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://example.com/LATEST.  Status information for this document may
   be found at https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-yang-config-
   template/.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the WG Working Group
   mailing list (mailto:WG@example.com), which is archived at
   https://example.com/WG.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/USER/REPO.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 20 March 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.







Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Concept . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Template Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Benefits of Templates in YANG Design  . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   6.  Conventions and Definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7

1.  Introduction

   This draft considers the case of a device where each such functional
   instance is to be controlled by a set of data nodes with almost
   identical values from instance to instance.

   Rather than defining a YANG model where all data nodes of all
   instances need to be configured one by one in the device running data
   store by the management system (e.g. a NC client), this document
   presents the idea of a “generic data model” in which the running data
   store is configured with a list of instances without explicit data
   node being configured and the instruction to locally populate each
   instance's data nodes with a copy of a "model" data node set (called
   "template") that is configured in the running data store.

   Although the data nodes of instances have largely similar values
   across, a small number of data nodes may however need to have a value
   that differs from the ones in the common template.  The generic
   method presented in this document also gives the possibility to
   overrule or complement values originating from the template, on a per
   instance basis.

2.  Concept

   a)Identify the set of replicable data nodes
   b)Configure a list of templates containing such data nodes
   c)Configure a list of instances, each of them referring to one of the
   configured templates along with any customization.
   d)Parent device instantiating the required data, controls each
   instance, ie: merges the data from template and instance and produce
   the final set of configurations per instance, like Netconf merge.






Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


    Eg:
    Identify common data nodes:
    a, b, c

    Configure list of templates:
    Template common {
             container{
                       a=x
                       b=y
                       c=z
                      }
                    }
     Configure list of instances with template reference:
     Instance {
              Template-reference = “common”
              a=z
              b
              c
              }
     Parent device produces final configuration for each instance:
      Instance {
                a=z
                b=y
                c=z
               }

3.  Template Mechanism

   The templates concept can be achieved with existing yang constructs
   like grouping and uses statements.

   Example:

   A)By defining common structures using grouping,you avoid repeating
   code,ensure consistency,and make future changes easier since
   modifications only need to happen in one place.

   Example: grouping interface-config { leaf interface-name { type
   string; } leaf admin-status { type boolean; } } Here, the interface-
   config grouping defines a common structure that could be reused
   across different YANG modules or different parts of the same module.
   B) "Uses" yang construct: The uses statement applies a previously
   defined grouping.  This allows the grouped set of definitions to be
   instantiated where needed in the model.  Example: container
   interfaces { list interface { key "interface-name"; uses interface-
   config; } } In this example, the uses statement applies the
   interface-config grouping defined earlier.




Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


   While conceptually, the idea of templates improves the re-usability
   and consistency factor, there are certain nuances, which needs to be
   addressed while handling data nodes in the grouping with defaults and
   mandatories and leafrefs.

   If the grouping created with replicable data nodes contains default
   or mandatory nodes, and such groupings are used both in the template
   and in the instance, there is a possibility of overwriting the
   configured value of the template with the default value in the
   instance due to the merge operation.

   When using leafref inside a grouping (which acts as a template),
   Extra care must be taken on the path specified.  This is because
   grouping is essentially a reusable blueprint, and the leafref path
   must be resolved correctly when the grouping is used in different
   contexts.  There are two primary approaches to using leafref in
   templates: A)Absolute Paths: These reference a specific location in
   the YANG tree.  B)Relative Paths: These are defined relative to the
   location where the grouping is used.  While there is no recommended
   option to resolve the path, it is a designers choice to choose
   Absolute path where the referred path is a fixed well defined global
   path and relative path which could be flexible and re-usable
   depending on the context in which the groupings are defined.

   In order to solve the issue with defaults and mandatories, existing
   yang language provides us with a powerful construct: "refine"

   The refine statement in YANG is used to modify or refine the
   definitions of a grouping when it is applied using the uses
   statement.  This is particularly useful when the same template (or
   grouping) is reused in different contexts but needs to be adjusted
   slightly without altering the original grouping definition.  While
   the refine statement is powerful, it can only be applied within the
   context of a uses statement, and it allows fine-tuning of things like
   mandatory requirements, default values, descriptions, and other
   constraints.

   How refine Works: The basic workflow for using refine with templates
   involves: 1.Defining a grouping(without mandatories and defaults),
   which acts as a template. 2.Applying the grouping with the uses
   statement. 3.Using the refine statement to modify specific
   characteristics of the applied grouping in a particular
   context(refine mandatories and defaults).

   Example of Using refine with Templates Step-1: Defining a Grouping
   (Template) Here, we define a basic grouping for an interface
   configuration.




Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


   grouping interface-config { leaf interface-name { type string;
   mandatory true; description "Name of the interface."; } leaf admin-
   status { type boolean; default "false"; description "Administrative
   status of the interface."; } } Step-2: Applying the Grouping with
   uses

   container interfaces { list interface { key "interface-name"; uses
   interface-config; } }

   At this point, we’ve reused the interface-config template for our
   interface list.  Now, we’ll refine this grouping to suit specific use
   cases.

   Step-3: Refining the Grouping: Let’s say in certain contexts we want
   to refine the interface-config grouping to: 1.Make the admin-status
   mandatory in certain cases. 2.Change the default value of admin-
   status. 3.Provide a more specific description for interface-name.

   container special-interfaces { list interface { key "interface-name";
   uses interface-config { refine admin-status { mandatory true; default
   "true"; } refine interface-name { description "Special interface name
   for critical operations."; } } } } In this example: •We’ve applied
   the interface-config grouping within the special-interfaces
   container. •The admin-status is made mandatory and its default value
   is set to true (instead of false). •The interface-name description is
   updated to reflect the specific context in which this grouping is
   being used.

4.  Benefits of Templates in YANG Design

   1.  Reusability: Templates encourage reusability by allowing common
       structures to be defined once and reused multiple times.  This
       reduces duplication and simplifies model management.

   2.  Consistency: By using templates, similar configurations are
       defined and applied uniformly, leading to more consistent data
       modeling and network configuration management.

   3.  Simplified Maintenance: When a template is modified, all places
       where it is used will automatically reflect those changes,
       reducing the effort required to maintain and update the model.

   4.  Modularity: Templates promote a modular approach to YANG model
       design.  By splitting the model into reusable parts, it becomes
       easier to scale and extend.






Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


5.  Conclusion

   Using templates (grouping and uses) in YANG allows for efficient
   reuse of model components.  The refine statement provides flexibility
   to adjust certain properties like mandatory or default in specific
   contexts. leafref enables cross-referencing of leaf values within or
   across modules, with careful attention to path resolution.  Proper
   use of these features helps create clean, modular, and maintainable
   YANG data models.

6.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

7.  Security Considerations

   TODO Security

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Authors' Addresses

   Robert Peschi
   Nokia
   Antwerp
   Email: robert.peschi@nokia.com




Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           yang-template-framework          September 2024


   Shiya Ashraf
   Nokia
   Antwerp
   Email: shiya.ashraf@nokia.com


   Deepak Rajaram
   Nokia
   Chennai
   Email: deepak.rajaram@nokia.com









































Peschi, et al.            Expires 20 March 2025                 [Page 8]
